# Assessing sequencing strategy effects on expression estimator performance
This repository accompanies our draft manuscript "Short paired-end reads trump long single-end reads for expression analysis", which summarizes our findings concerning the robustness of gene and isoform-level expression estimates and downstream differential expression results generated with alternative RNA-seq sequencing strategies. The primary focus of this work was to determine whether short paired-end sequencing outperforms single-end sequencing of longer reads, when both strategies sequence the same number of nucleotides, such that they are equivalent in cost. When one has an annotated genome, a common practice is to obtaine gene-level expression estimates using single-end reads, particularly if there are budgetary constraints. Yet, this approach does not take advantage of the information contained in the full library fragment, i.e. the potentially greater mapping specificity that would accompany sequencing reads from both ends of a fragment. While sequencing the same read length for single and paired-end strategies would lead to two times the cost for the latter, our intuition was that shorter paired-end reads might lead to improvements in expression estimates over single-end sequencing, over and above any performance penalties resulting from shorter reads. We demonstrate that this is in fact the case. 

This repository provides generic command line arguments for [kallisto](https://pachterlab.github.io/kallisto/) and [RSEM](https://github.com/deweylab/RSEM), the expression estimation tools we utilized. Because we also evaluated downstream effects on differential expression tests, we provide example R scripts for [sleuth](https://pachterlab.github.io/sleuth/about), which we use to analyze kallisto expression estimates, and [limma-voom](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html), which we use to analyze RSEM-derived estimates.   
